
# Unreconciled Truth  

I KNOW all the questions that will arise in your minds with regard to the things that cannot be reconciled with what I am saying. You will say: We have been told, we have been urged, - this has been said, -- we have been instructed, brought up in this fashion. Against that I have nothing to say. If you are thirsty you will drink the waters of the well; if you are not thirsty you will just pass by. And as the world is really thirsty, and perhaps some of you, it is better not to attempt to reconcile. Why do you want to reconcile? If you are trying to reconcile, you will be lost in the reconciliation. But if you want to understand the purpose of life and desire to experiment, then you must not be led across the lawn of life, the road of life by another. 

As the parched lands await the rains that shall nourish, that shall give them cool shades and green lawns, so those who have a desire to understand life, but who have their hearts and minds parched, warped and usurped by fear, to them the tidings of freedom, the news of happiness and the way of attainment of the Truth should be welcome. But to welcome the shade, to welcome the green lawns and the tender leaves, they must have been burnt and have known the struggle, the anxiety of the lack of water. Those who have a desire to see the cool green, to enjoy the fresh breezes from the mountains when the rain comes, must utilize it to its fullest extent, they must be prepared to store it for many summers in their hearts and in their minds. Truth is the only balm, the precious ointment that shall cure the wounds of sorrow, the scars of experience; but if it is not truly taken to the heart and translated greatly by the mind, there will be a gross misunderstanding and a perversion of judgment. I am not concerned with how many followers there shall be of the Truth, but I am concerned with how many will understand the Truth and give of that Truth to every passer-by. I am concerned with those who will really drink of the waters of life rather than gather those waters in a small vessel, where they will stagnate, and then worship that stagnation. 

And as I have found, as I have attained, and in me the Truth is well-established, I would show you the way of enlightenment; I would give the waters that shall quench your thirst, that shall bring forth green shoots from the dead stumps of yesterday. But before you can drink of those waters, you must understand intelligently, you must have your mind and your heart clean, unprejudiced, full, at whatever stage of life you may be.
 
Of the measure of that understanding each one must decide for himself. No one else can give you the knowledge of your advance, of your progress, of your attainment. If any one were able to do that it would be a betrayal of the Truth.
 
If a man has not ploughed and tilled his land, then when the rain comes it will not bring forth. But when a man has cultivated, has cared for and lovingly developed his land, then the rain shall bring to fruition the seeds he has sown.
 
This is not mystical or occult; Truth is neither mysticism nor occultism. Occultism and mysticism are the limitations which man puts upon Truth. Truth has nothing to do with the limitations you would impose upon it. You are concerned all the time with compromise, how to reconcile the Truth, which I put before you with the lesser things that exist around you. Then there is struggle; there is renunciation and the discontentment not born out of intelligence. 

Once in many centuries -- this is not a threat or a promise or a hope which I am dangling in front of you for your enticement to Nirvana, heaven or happiness -- once in many centuries a human being attains and gives of his understanding of that attainment; once in a hundred years the century plant, gathering its strength, puts forth its flower for the delight of every passer-by. If the passer-by is wise, eager in his search, and puts aside the things that are less important, that are secondary to the perfume of that flower, or to the understanding of him who has attained -- if he desires to stop and take the perfume and the understanding to his heart and mind, he will find that with Truth there can be no compromise. It is with the little things, the things that are unessential that you can compromise. And as every one in the world is concerned with this compromise, with the reconciliation of beliefs strongly instilled into him, the news of attainment, the perfume of freedom and of happiness, passes him by and leaves him parched, empty as a shell. 

So I would that I could bind your mind and your heart -- I am not using that word in its narrow sense --' to the eternal Truth and not to those things that have been stepped down, and which are a betrayal of the Truth. 

To the minds of most people it seems necessary to have an intermediary, an interpreter of the Truth. And I want to show that such a mediator must of necessity step down the Truth and that a mediator is unnecessary to life. By a mediator I mean a guru -- that a guru, in its narrowest sense of the word is unnecessary, and that in order to have a criterion by which to judge our feelings and our thoughts it is easier, I hold, to use the goal itself as the mediator, as the ultimate guru, and not another, either a person or an ideal, which would help momentarily. Because I hold that the person who helps momentarily is stepping down the Truth, and that the danger of that stepping down of the Truth is the betrayal of the goal, of the ultimate. If each one, therefore, fixes his own goal, which is: the goal of the world, and is hence thereby creating order, that will act as the guru, as the mediator, as a necessary requirement in helping each one to go towards the goal. 

C> * 
C> 
C> * *  