
# Invite Doubt   

THE MANNER of my attainment has been that I have worshipped at every shrine, consciously or unconsciously in this life; I have followed, I have obeyed, I have put a limitation on that very thing which I wished to free. And I have watched others in that struggle to free, to fulfil life. I have seen multitudes in their struggle to free life oppressed by the desire of another. I have seen the people who are wise and yet who lack that eternal happiness, who are lonely because they have not fulfilled life, who are lonely though surrounded by a multitude because they have not realized or attained that life. I have watched all these things. And as with a river, it is the volume of water which drives it towards the sea, so I have been driven by the volume of my own experience, by my own understanding, and hence there has been fulfilment. 

Because I am free, not conditioned by any belief, not held by any society, order, religion or creed -- and again I say this in all sincerity, and I hope you will believe it in the understanding of your heart -- I would make everyone free, not invite them to my particular cage -- I have no cage. My fear is that because each one wishes to enter into a larger cage than his own, he will utilize what I am saying to make of it another cage. That would be the denial, would be the betrayal of Truth. I want, if I can, to show you the light, but you must light your own torch at the eternal flame. When once you have established understanding and affection within yourself, you will not. be swept off your feet by the wind of authority or be caught up in the net of tradition or in the cloud of beliefs. 

Because these ideas are new, there will be many who will hurl themselves against them, there will be many who will question, many who will criticise, many who by their cunning arguments, by their cleverness will upset you individually and hence upset your ideas. And I want this seed which is sown in the mind of each, to grow in spite of the constant winds that tear up, the constant storms that destroy. And to strengthen that seed which shall grow into a mighty tree for the protection of every passer-by, you must, from the very outset, invite doubt. Examine all your beliefs, all your theories, all your knowledge by inviting doubt, not by letting doubt creep into your heart. I hold that doubt is essential for the discovering and the understanding of the Truth. If you merely accept, without the invitation of doubt and its cruelty of examination, then what you have is not real. On a spring day you can watch, how on the roadside, there is a flower, which has struggled to express itself all through the winter, and a boy, comes along and tears it up and so it is destroyed. Likewise, if your knowledge has not withstood the cruelty of doubt, that knowledge, that understanding of the Truth will be of no value; and as a beautiful thing, which a boy destroys, so will all your structure be destroyed. So, to establish that understanding of the Truth for yourselves, you will have to invite doubt and not shun it, but let it come with its tremendous harshness and cruelty, and examine yourselves by that and scrutinize the very knowledge which you are supposed to have gained. For I tell you that orthodoxy is set up when the mind and the heart are in decay. But when the mind and the heart in their fullness invite doubt, then there shall be no orthodoxy, there shall be no authority, and there shall be no small, petty beliefs in personalities. You are all, at present, in that stage when you can easily be upset, when all your theories, or rather your new understanding of the Truth will break before the storm of doubt. Because I hold that so far you have worshipped personalities, so far you have held the Truth in the vessels created by humanity, and you have not worshipped the principle itself, the Truth itself. You have only worshipped the Truth that is partially contained in a human individual. But when you invite doubt, it is as the rain that washes away the dust of tradition, which is the dust of the ages, the dust of belief, and leaves you certain of those things which are essential, and the things that are valueless, that are of no importance, are washed away. 

You can all be made to doubt by another, doubt the very knowledge, the very understanding that you may have gathered out of your suffering. But doubt which is not of your own does not purify; it only strengthens your narrow beliefs, it only gives permanence to your narrow form of worship of personalities, of clinging to something which is for the moment a comfort and hence a betrayal of the Truth. But if you have invited doubt in the fullness of your heart to test that understanding of the Truth of which you have caught a glimpse, then doubt that very doubt, what remains will be pure, absolute and final. 

After all, what I am saying does not depend on Krishnamurti, is not of any person, is not the -creation of an individual, but it is the eternal Truth. And in order to understand the absolute and the eternal, you must have had the shadow of doubt cast upon your understanding. And as most people are afraid of doubt, think that it is a crime, a sin, they put doubt away from their minds, and hence grow strong in their narrowness, in their pettiness, in their worship of personalities, in their shelters which breed decay and comfort. Whereas, if you invite doubt into your heart and into your mind, and if you pursue that doubt logically into all the corridors, avenues and shades of the mind and the heart, and relentlessly scrutinize and examine all things, then what remains will be of your own knowledge and hence the absolute, the eternal. 

Because I have always been doubting, rejecting all things, accepting only those things that have value in the light of the eternal, only taking the kernel and not the frills of the Truth that has been stepped down, only by rejecting personalities and putting aside the pictures that the world worships, I have been able to grow. And when I invited the final doubt, so that it might destroy the very creation that had grown through small doubts, what remained was the Truth without end, the life that is not bound by any barriers, the happiness which cannot be destroyed by any shadows. And as I am certain of my knowledge and of my attainment, so would I make you certain of your knowledge, of your future or present attainment. And if you have the understanding, if you have the courage to invite doubt, then you will be the true disciples of the Truth and not the disciples of an individual -- as you are at present. If this individual called Krishnamurti goes away, you will be caught up again in your old traditions, in your old beliefs, in your old forms of worship of personalities, and you will be held in the machinery that is stepping down the Truth.

So I want you to invite doubt and with that doubt logically to examine all that you hold as dear, precious and most vital. And you will realize that all that you hold, your beliefs, your traditions, your second-hand knowledge, passes away, and you will destroy the great structure which you have built vainly, uselessly through the ages. After all, that is what you have to face all the time through life. You do not cling to something that you have built in the past, you do not hold to beliefs that are no longer useful, you no longer take to your heart the personality that has stood between you and your Truth, if you are a true seeker of the understanding of life, which is the Truth and hence eternal happiness. Then these barriers of beliefs, these barriers of personalities and their small understandings, these barriers of authorities and their shelters of decay, will all disappear. Then only will you be able to understand, then only will you be certain, so that you can give the waters of life, which shall quench the thirst of the world. 

And the only manner of attainment, of gaining the Truth, is not to be caught up in the shelter of half-truths. The way to the eternal Truth lies in the setting aside of your beliefs and your dogmas, your half-understandings and your timid visions of the Truth; by always rejecting, by always asking; not by being contented, not by merely worshipping personalities and those that are established in the temples, those that are standing between you and the Truth. You must tear away everything in order to find, doubt everything in order to discover. And then only shall the waters of life flow through the entire world and not, as happens in the desert, after a while disappear into the sands. 

I do not want you to worship me; I do not want you to believe in the things that I say; I do not want you to create out of me a shrine for your shelter; I do not want you to use me as a crutch; because what you see of me, this personality, this body, is the most unreal, decaying, perishing thing. But when you have understood what lies behind this form, which can only be done by inviting doubt, by constantly rejecting, and in that way establishing within yourself the knowledge of Truth -- then only will you be able always to give the Truth in its pristine beauty, without stepping it down. You can see how, throughout the ages, the so-called disciples of the Truth have worshipped personalities, and in worshipping personalities and in urging others to do the same, they have stepped down the Truth and hence they have betrayed the Truth. You all know a very famous saying of the Lord Buddha. He said: Even though I say it, it is not true to you if you do not understand it. And because they have not followed that saying and only worshipped the personality, the form that contained the Truth, they have got all the complexities of beliefs, the warping created by prejudice, the pettiness of worship, the narrowness of shrines. And if you go out - as you have to go out -and give this new idea, and stand, not upon any authority, but upon your own understanding of the Truth, -- then you will not betray it, you will not be stepping it down, you will not be creating useless shelters and vain decaying images that only give half-truths, and not the Truth in its entirety. Then you are beyond doubt and that is the criterion of a truly civilized man. 

* 

** 